So of course, yeah, I'm going to run through a few questions and feel free to share more
or less however you feel with the questions.
So just the first one, can you tell us your name please?
Mrs. May Lida.
Where and when were you born?
In Rochers, 4th of July 1946.
Do you speak another language as well?
We speak the patois and the French.
Are you able to also introduce yourself in terms of your name and where you were born
in patois or French?
In French, yeah.
Okay.
Je m'appelle Madame May Lida et je suis née à L'Hémorice en 1946.
J'ai 5 enfants et j'habite à Newport à présent.
Do you remember the area that you grew up in?
Bobassa.
Bobassa, okay.
And what was it like growing up there?
It's this village, quiet, people know each other.
Those days life was just easy going.
We didn't know what it's like to have worry.
I didn't have to go to work.
I was in school, just running around after school, coming home.
We were just happy, easy going.
We get along with the neighbours.
It's a lot of family to get together.
Every Sunday we're never home.
We can, we either by the sea or go to church on the pilgrim day.
And we have a picnic so that was a routine every Sunday.
Different beaches every week.
And weddings and parties, always something at the weekend, never boat.
No.
What was your favourite memory as a child?
School, going to school, going to church, singing the choir, going for rehearsal.
I was in the girls guide as well so we did that Saturday morning.
We had to go for meetings.
So it was good.
And what about the opposite?
What's the fondest memory of your childhood?
Is there something else that you didn't really enjoy in your childhood?
Well, my mum died.
I was seven and I didn't know my father.
And we lived with my grandmother then when my mum died in her house.
And then my grandmother moved.
I moved with my great grandmother until I was eleven.
She died.
So I went back to my maternal grandmother.
We lived with her until I met my husband.
We got married and we came here.
So that was a short childhood I think.
Everything went so quick from there.
How old was you when you married?
I don't know, I was seventeen because he had to leave the country.
And then when we came here we had a religious, because we had to have a civil marriage.
And we hadn't been a minor those days.
You're not allowed to get married without consent.
So we just had a quick civil marriage.
And when we came to Newport we had a religious marriage.
So of course then, what type of celebrations can you also remember as a child?
Wedding, being bridesmaid.
Every wedding, every family would be asked to be bridesmaid.
It was good fun, dressing up, it was nice.
And what type of traditions would you say are different within those types of weddings
towards the Western forms of weddings?
Well here, if you go to a wedding the organisation is not the same.
It's not like family orientated.
Everybody isn't united, it's all different.
They stay in their corner and they don't like converse.
But not like at home, no way.
Since you come in you're meeting people and you have your toast, the bride and groom dance.
And then we'll be dancing till four o'clock in the morning before we go home.
What type of customs in terms of like, is there music, is there drumming?
We did modern music like ballroom dancing.
And then we got our original dance which is the Sega, come from Africa.
That's our national dance.
But then you keep that till the end.
But in the beginning it's the walls and the slow and a bit of a mix.
So the Sega come at the end when it's the final then.
Near the end of the reception.
Was there any kind of other celebrations that you enjoy too?
Well it's always been dinner party on a Sunday.
It could be a christening, it could be a holy communion, or engagement.
Or just going for a picnic on a beach.
What was that like as well, having water very very close to you and a part of your childhood?
We like paddling but none of us like to swim.
We just paddle and some are good swimmers but there's been a couple of deaths.
So that's put me off when we see your friends drown.
That's put me off that is going in deep.
So then if we were moving over to travel into the UK you said you travelled through marriage and you come straight to Newport?
Yes straight to Newport.
Why was that?
When my husband came, his uncle was in London, his cousin was already here.
1962 he got married and came here.
The thing is his father-in-law used to work on a boat and another friend from Mauritius.
So when they docked in Newport it was a nice place to settle.
So they stayed here and when he was coming his cousin said you don't need to go to London in a flat.
I already got a house in Bill.
So he had a room with them so this is where we stayed.
But we commute, family in France, London and it was fun.
They like coming to Wales, the park, the beach, we take them out.
And they love it, the countryside.
We were not all in one place.
So when we see each other it was nice.
And then you go home and then you see each other again.
So it was good like that.
That's 1962 then?
No.
Your cousin was in 1962?
He came first, my husband came in 1964.
He is already settled in Newport.
And you came in 1964?
I came after 1965.
And did you have any expectations of the UK before you came?
No.
Didn't even know where I was going.
Just calling the place.
How did that feel as well actually?
It was a bit sad.
It was on my own mind.
And when I got to London we got to come to Newport by train.
I haven't got a clue of where Newport was.
And my husband never told me.
And he just sit there and I see people getting off.
And I'm thinking, where is Newport?
He didn't say nothing.
Everybody's getting off.
It was a small train those days.
He stopped at Caldy Court, something, something.
And I'm going, where is Newport?
He didn't say nothing.
He was laughing.
And then finally we got to Newport.
And the high street was a lot of people going up and down.
And then we walked from the train station to town.
And I think there's buses there.
We go to Peel and I can't remember that bit.
But I could see a lot of people walking.
It was nice.
Different.
It was strange.
But I make friends.
Because I am very talkative and not shy.
And so the landlord was Asian.
And they speak to me.
And they say, how come you speak English?
And I said, well, I only left school a year ago to get married.
Oh, yeah, so I was teaching them English.
So we became friends since then.
Even if they see me now, they're like, oh, hello lady.
Remember you?
They all know me.
Yeah, they remember.
So it sounds as if you had loads of opportunities which you took in order to settle in.
So that made him a bit more comfortable being here now?
Otherwise I would have been lonely.
It was only a bedside man we had.
And when my husband said to me to go to the post office, I said, where's the post office?
He said, there's only one main road.
You won't get lost.
And he said, just take the main road and then come back.
Oh my God.
This is how I learn.
And I know.
You said you spoke about that bit of sadness of having to leave home.
What would you say was the most important thing that you had to leave behind?
My grandmother.
She was old.
Now she wanted probably see me and my family very often but being the distance.
We couldn't go.
I went to see her once and then she died after.
Very similar to my staff as well.
Same thing.
I went and then it was time for her to go.
With your grandmother as well, because you grew up living at your grandmother's house.
Did I give you that opportunity in the space to learn loads of the traditions and learn more about your culture as well?
Because your grandmother was the one teaching you.
Well, since teachers have begun to go to church, you know, the right way we learn to do housework.
Because that's the main thing a girl ought to learn.
Because if she gets married she's got to learn to cook and clean and teach all the basics.
So you lost her one day because she did say to me, I am not getting any younger, you know.
So you got to do all that and then to survive.
So then coming here then?
That's the only reason she agreed for me to come here.
Because she said if anything happens to her, where would I go?
And I was just going to say, so you were kind of equipped and being able to be here and fend and live for yourself because you had been taught how to do so.
And how was that as well then after you had settled in to Newport?
What can you say was kind of the best things about being in Newport and even the worst as well?
One, as you said, coming here and then why you settled in in Newport?
Because my husband got a job there, he never thought of moving.
Because everything was so close, like hospitals, schools, you just have to walk.
But if I lived in London I would have had to learn to catch buses and underground.
Because I come from a village, just walk and catch the bus to go visit friends, family on a Sunday.
That was the tradition, you had to go and visit your family and have a chat, something to eat and come back.
But I said if I live in London, how am I going to go shopping?
So I stayed in Newport because I felt more settled here.
I could walk the children to school, come home, do my shopping by the time they come home.
If I had a doctor's appointment, it was only down the road.
If I had to go to the hospital, it was only 20 minutes walk from my house.
So it was quite handy.
But his heart was in London where all his uncles, sisters were.
And we tried to move but we looked at the price of houses because he had a job in Dagenham.
He was commuting, coming home and staying with my brother-in-law in Arsenal.
We did look at the houses, they were not suitable.
And the children said, no we are not leaving our schools, so we never move.
Did that give you the space again to start teaching the children about your ways and upskilling them as well?
Always, yes.
That's why I took Jordan to see how we lived.
Not everybody got to story houses.
My family is still poor, living in bungalow.
So they appreciate life a bit better.
And we don't come from story houses, you know, with washing machine and all.
I showed them in the river where people are still washing.
And people in the house still washing on the stone, you call it?
You wash your clothes by hands.
I fell off one and there is the poor one.
So I showed them how I was growing up.
What kind of my life was.
Not luxury, you know, climbing mango trees, running around barefoot, you know.
So they appreciated them, so they know the culture.
Otherwise they think we all got big houses because it's not like that.
Was that obvious as well when you came here in terms of the upbringing of the children and the young people because they didn't have that?
Was that obvious?
Yes.
And maybe again, there might be an obvious response to it, but do you feel that that's what also gave you resilience because you knew exactly where you come from?
Yes, and you never forget.
Another child, the way you were brought up.
It was the best time really.
You can never go back to this type of life again.
It's not the same, it's moving too fast now.
Very, very, very fast.
And even about moving fast, what do you think is important about the next generation or our children to learn and to know?
How to live modest.
Don't forget their roots.
Always be there.
If you keep your roots, you won't go wrong in life.
Don't follow the bad way.
Follow your family way.
The old-fashioned way is the best, I think.
Did that also remain strong because you were visiting your families?
Yes.
And how did you feel about the experience?
I was very happy.
How was visiting your families?
I know you said even when you were here...
If I don't go there, not everybody can come and see me.
You see?
So they look forward to seeing me.
Some are very old.
Some are very poor.
Some have never lived in the house.
So the only time they see me is when I go and see them.
See?
That's why I try and make an effort.
Because every time I've gone, somebody has died.
It didn't have to be all younger than myself.
Every year I've gone.
Every year I've gone, we've lost so many members of the family.
Do you feel the children are doing that as well now?
I hope so when I'm not here.
I hope they keep the tradition.
Yeah.
I hope so.
Because you then get to connect and share stories, especially if it's how fast-paced things are going now.
Well, they think it's a paradise.
Blue sea and sky. I said, no, you live there first.
And then you see if it's a paradise.
That is hardship, you know?
What would you say you love most about your culture?
We were brought up with respect.
We were taught to respect.
We were sociable.
You know, socialising all the time.
Any time, any occasion.
You don't need an excuse to have a get-together.
And most of all, you live, what you call it, a right way, like law-abiding.
We don't break any rules.
We don't, you know, go into drugs, into fights and things like this.
Just live modest and peaceful and happy.
I agree.
What elements of your culture have you made an effort to preserve?
If there's still the traditions we were just talking about, going to visit others.
Are there other customs or language of food or even types of celebrations?
Food is a multicultural country.
You have every kind of food.
Every nationality, we all live as one.
Everybody has different religions.
But when we're together, we are as one.
That's the way it's been.
And I hope they keep it that way, don't divide.
So that's one of the things to preserve, is to carry on the multicultural embracing of that.
Very true.
What type of things have you done in order?
Do you still do to preserve and to carry on the multicultural connections?
I teach the children, even if they don't believe in God, sometimes go to church.
It's nice to believe in something, you know, because one day you need him.
You don't have to be really just up to your neck.
I'm not saying that.
You can take the good in something and follow the right path.
Because there's two paths in life.
You can take the bad one, like I said to them, and you can take the good one.
That is good friends and that is bad friends.
So I've always teach them just follow the right way.
And we'll go wrong then.
I agree.
Thank you for sharing that as well.
I just wanted to speak a little bit about Age Alive, of course.
Can you describe how, from your journey, because while you were here you were working and teaching as you said.
No, teaching.
English?
No.
I never worked when I came here.
I had the family first.
And then time was getting a bit hard.
Landward, my husband was working.
Every year there'd be a strike.
So my neighbour said to me one day, they're asking for people in Grumpton batteries.
To work, are you interested?
I said, do you not remember work?
What do I know about work?
I'm a teenager, I come in this country, I got married, I've got a family.
I only know how to cook and wash.
He introduced me to the catering.
Somebody was on the sick and they took me on to cover.
And they teach me everything from A, who's a nice old lady there.
They got to know me and they liked me.
And I liked my money then.
So when the lady came back after sick, so I had to leave.
It was a bit sad then.
And soon after, because I had no phone those days, one of the Jamaican Mrs. Carnegie,
she came and knocked on my door and she said, would you come back?
They all like you.
So I'd been there and I worked.
And I was very happy.
So I'd been there and I worked ever since.
Is that Lorna?
Mrs. Carnegie, she's in the home now.
Slim, not Lorna.
I was thinking Robert's mother.
Robert's Carnegie's mother.
Elaine?
Something like that.
So I never knew because years ago we called each other Mrs. Carnegie.
That's all I know.
So when I started working, I worked until I retired then.
And when I retired, I was lost.
And of course my husband died in the process.
So I thought what am I supposed to do now?
Because I used to work weekend.
If somebody wanted the time of New Year, I used to cover because the children then was
old enough to cook.
If you tell Andrew, I'm going to cook.
I'm going to cook.
If you tell Andrew, now he used to have a job to do if you ask him.
He had a job to do when I go to work.
So they all manage.
And then I could come home and finish off and we have dinner.
So I used to cover everybody who wanted time off because they had babies.
So even Christmas and New Year I used to go.
It's only part time then.
And so when that happened and I retired, I'd seen a friend of mine in PIL.
And she said to me, what are you doing now?
I said, I'm checking the thing.
Oh, she said, come with me.
I'll show you where I go on Wednesday.
St. Mary's Hall.
And she introduced me to Roy.
And Mrs. Hillel was there.
And she said, do you know who that is?
I said, well, that's Andre's mother.
You see, I can't go anywhere.
People don't see.
So they were, since then I just, I took to them and they took to me.
And I'm still here now.
And he got me out of the house, take me places I haven't been.
Because we never had a chance to go anywhere when the kids were school.
And places even in England we haven't seen.
So now I've got the opportunity to go around.
So what does that mean to you as well then?
Being able to see these places and now that you've come?
I'm very grateful because I didn't know those places existed.
Things I didn't do when I was young.
You know, coming here at such a young age.
And now I've seen a bit of life, I think.
A bit of fun as well.
You know, when you're scooping a house, a housewife and go to work.
All you know is housework, feeding and going out as a family.
But never been out on my own or anything.
It's a new experience to me.
Being able to stand on my own feet now, see.
It's great to hear as well and to see how it factored into the fact that you said you had the household and working all that time.
Didn't have that opportunity.
So now as it's come it's beautiful to see as well.
Was there one or two moments or events that stand out in each of your life?
Yeah, we've done Black History, we've done, I've done a play.
Roy, we've done a couple of plays.
Okay, I would see one, yeah.
We love to see the, I don't know if he's got a video, we were on stage a couple of times, yeah.
How was that experience?
At first I thought I can't do it, I won't remember the lines.
So after we done it, it was okay.
Did you do it again?
I said to him, you know, I'm going to see now, I won't remember everything.
And you've said a little bit actually, well quite a fair amount, but how do you think Age Alive supports Black Asian or other minority or majority of over 50s?
Oh, Age Alive has brought a lot of Caribbean people together and because we're diverse, any nationality comes in.
I think they learn a lot from the group, things they didn't do like me, they didn't know, they didn't have the opportunity to go out, like women only.
So I think it's done a great advantage for them all, yeah, they've opened our eyes really.
That's again fantastic to hear and to see these parts of the stories.
Within regards to the family, is there any kind of family heirlooms, like photographs or ornaments that you have?
The trouble is I've lost, I had a picture of my grandmother, I don't know where it is.
You see what happened is when it was bad weather, the house was leaking and I think my grandmother's lost a lot of possession, photograph of me, even my mother, I don't know if there's anything left, nothing.
Is there anything that your children have of you that you want them or they should be keeping in terms of memories or ornaments that are connected to you?
They got my photograph when I was my passport and my holy communion.
My mum made that before she died because she was a good dressmaker, that's the only thing.
Are you able to learn how to make some dresses as well then?
That's the trouble, I didn't. I was too young when she died, otherwise I would have been a good dressmaker.
Because for a living, every woman had to learn to sew, that was their way of living.
They didn't go out to work unless you're a maid.
So that's why they're made, what do you call it, earnings.
That's all the questions, I don't know if there's anything else you wanted to share or any messages or anything like that that you wanted to share at all.
Well, you know my grandson and you can see by looking at him that he's been brought up, my husband has taught him a good, like he was brought up.
So he wants them to do the same, look, he's put his mind into weight lifting and as you know yourself, he's not going out gambling,
he's not getting involved in any gambling because that's what my husband used to say to them, the right way and your family honour.
Don't put shame in a family, don't give your family a bad name.
So as you see now, that is how they're growing up, that's how they're following the footpaths of their grandfather, what he's been injecting to them.
And if you speak to Mario, he'll tell you, they say me was strict and they respect that.
Their father would teach them the right way, you know.
Because even now people respect you, you know, everywhere you go they say, oh this family was good, I used to go and play with their children,
I used to go in their house, they used to feed me, you know what I mean, that's, we've kept a good reputation.
You know what I mean? So you speak to them, you can see for yourself, the example they've had.
Thank you, thank you very much.
So you can tell Jordan now I've praised him.
I will too.
And his dad as well, he doesn't smoke, my husband did have a cigar once a year, that's all, Christmas.
And everybody likes his drinks, but Mario don't drink now.
But you know, the family man, Mario's a good father, and he's teaching his children now to be like his dad.
You know, he don't like it if they're smoking and drinking, so it's only Shane who smokes, he tells him off.
Look after your health, you know what I mean, but you can see the way he is, this is how my husband was with them.
That's very, very, very clear.